---
RFC: "0002"
title: Working Groups
author: Mark Bennett <mark@devedmonton.com>
type: process
status: draft
---

# Abstract

This outlines a process by which the Dev Edmonton Society (DES) creates and maintains a set of Working Groups, along with a list of the active and retired Working Groups.

Each Working Group carries out a function of significance to DES, and with the support of DES resources. Individual working groups can follow their own processes but all have a Champion who oversees their work, along with published communications, meetings, and other resources.

# Participate

* [GitHub](https://github.com/devedmonton/rfcs/blob/master/_rfcs/rfc-0002.md)

# Status

This propsal is a draft with outstanding issues to address. The Society is currently implementing this process and looking for feedback from key stakeholders, members, and Working Group Champions. Send feedback to mark@devedmonton.com, or [create a pull request and file issues on GitHub](https://github.com/devedmonton/rfcs).

This process will be reviewed with a plan to become an official process in August 2020.

# Author(s)

* Mark Bennett <mark@devedmonton.com>

# Motivation

As a society we want to improve the lives of Edmonton developers as much as possible, enriching the broader community through them. Working Groups allow all Dev Edmonton Society members to quickly and effectively perform interesting work of their choosing.

Working Groups keep the work of DES open, collaborative, and welcoming to members of all abilities, interest, and availability.

DES provides Working Groups with resources, a platform, and shared experience to empower members.

In the past, the Board, along with a small adhoc group of members, has done most of the day-to-day work of the Society. The Working Groups are succeeding if the majority of the Society's work leaves the Board and is instead taken up by the Working Groups.

# Background

The Dev Edmonton Society was founded with the belief that an empowered and vibrant developer community enriches all Edmontonians. As part of this vision, we believe that empowering our members to better help themselves and become involved in the work of the society and the community as a whole is our primary mandate.

In the past this work has been constrained by the resources and time of the society's Board of Directors who have performed all of the strategic and day-to-day operations of society. Working Groups tranistion these activities out of the Board and into Working Groups that contain members of the society and the community at large.

Working Groups also make this work more visible and accessible to members that may want to get involved in their communtiy and the work of the Society but don't know what's happening or the best way to get involved.

The Working Group process acknowledges that the time and quality of support members are able to give can very greatly. Every contribution to the work of the Society is valued, and the Working Groups provide opportunities for members of all availability and skill to contribute in a meaningful way. 

The idea of Working Groups, sometimes called Special Interest Groups or SIGs, are not unique to the Dev Edmonton Society and have been used by other groups such as the IEEE, W3C, Python, and other academic, technical, and social groups to focus and align the efforts of large organizations. Inspired by these groups and by collecting members with shared interests together, and empowering them with the resources they need to succeeed, it is the hope of the Society to do more work, and in a more visible and impactful way.

# Anatomy of a Working Group

Working Groups make it easy for members of the society to discover, initiate and engage with the work they're pasionate about.

Each Working Group is made up of a group of society members who work together to achieve a specific goal. This goal can be on-going, such as providing support for local meetup organizers, or targetted towards a specific outcome, such as bringing a specific conference or technology to Edmonton.

The work of the Working Group is moved forward by a group of members, however at any one time a single Champion is selected by the Working Group to chair meetings and provide a single point of contact for other members, the community, and the Board, and generally champion the work of the group and it's members. Should the Working Group lose it's Champion then another member may step forward to take their place, or the Working Group can elect to dissolve. All Working Groups should have a Champion.

By forming a Working Group members benefit from official support of the Dev Edmonton Society and it's resources. This includes access to:

 * hold funds in the Dev Edmonton Society bank account
 * make use of emails at the @devedmonton.com domain
 * create and use mailing lists
 * share events using the DES Eventbrite account
 * the official Slack channels, on a Slack with over 1000 members
 * GitHub organization
 * Clubhouse project management account
 * event recording hardware and expertise
 * and any other resources DES has to offer

Working Groups may choose to meet and organize using the tools and procedures they see fit, however we ask that they share these in as open, collaborative and welcoming way as possible, not-with-standing the right to privacy and resources available to DES to do so.

If a working group meets on a regular basis, we encourage them to share the schedule and calendar so that interested members may get involved. Most Working Groups choose to either do all work asynchronously using the mailing list and Slack channel, or to meet on a monthly, bi-monthly, or quarterly schedule. Sharing via a Google Calendar, Meetup.com events, posts on a mailing list, or Eventbrite are all reasonable.

Each working group has a single website where information about it's work can be found. Depending on the type of work, and the size of the group this website could be a GitHub repository, Clubhouse project, Google Group, or static website with links to all of the above. Whatever site is chosen it should include enough information that members of the society can quickly access the output of the Working Group, contact the Working Group Champion, and understand and contribute to on-going work and discussions.

The Society reminds all Working Groups that messages on Slack are not permenant and everything posted there will disappear after a month or so. If recording a disucssion or decision is important, then Slack is not the place to record it.

# Current Working Groups

| Working Group Name | Mandate | Champion | Website | Mailing List | Slack Channel | Meetings |
|--------------------|---------|---------|---------|--------------|---------------|---|
| Board of Governers | Provide oversight and strategic direction to DES. | Mark Bennett | ?? | ?? | #dev-edmonton-society | bi-monthly, per calendar |
| Event Recording    | Allow event hosts to record and share events. | Aaron Yong | ?? | ?? | #event-recording | none |
| Meetup Support | Provide resources, materials, and services to make running meetups and events easier. | Mark | | | | bi-monthly, per calendar |
| Finance | Control and report on DES finances | Estyn Edwards | | | | monthly |
| Slack | Handle defining Slack Code of Conduct, and performing moderation, discipline and a healthy community. | Ashia | | | | TBD |
| Website & Media | Manage DES social media and web properties | Aaron Yong | | | | TBD |

# Retired Working Groups

None.

# Creating A New Working Group

Any member of the society can put forward a proposal to create a new working group, for approval by The Board.

A proposal to create a Working Group should include:

1. The name of the new Working Group
1. A descrption of the Working Group's mandate. What work is the group trying to complete?
1. The name and email of the Working Group's Champion
1. The desired website for the Working Group
1. The desired mailing list for the Working Group, if one will exist
1. The desired Slack channel, if one will exist. Existing Slack channels can also be integrated into a new Working Group.
1. A schedule of meetings, such as the first Tuesday at 8:00pm every other month starting Feb 4th 2020. The calendar or mailing list where meetings are announced should also be shared. If all work is done asynchronously, then this should be noted instead.

Should this information be lacking, or the proposal found lacking, then it will fail and a new motion will need to be put forward in the future.

Should the motion pass, then the Working Group will be created and added to the list maintained by the Society. Upon creation of a WG, notification will be sent to either existing Working Group Champions or all Society Members, at the discretion of the board.

# Retiring A Working Group

As the objectives of a Working Group are met, or the work is deemed no longer valuable by members of the Society then a motion dissolving the Working Group can be put forward by any member of the Society at a meeting of the Board or at the AGM.

In the event that a Working Group is dissolved, then every effort will be made to archive and preserve the records and work of the Working Group for posterity, within limits deemed reasonable by the Board.

# Dissolving A Working Group

Should a Working Group ever lose it's Champion without a new one stepping forward, or all members of the working group leave, then after a reasonable notice and waiting period then The Board may move to dissolve a Working Group.

If a Working Group is ever found to be engaging in actions which violate the DES member agreement, Alberta or Canadian laws, or undermine the work of the Dev Edmonton Society as a whole then The Board may also put forward a motion to the DES members to dissolve the Working Group without notice.

Working Groups may also be dissolved at the discretion of The Board given sufficient notice and passing of a motion of the Society members.

# Conflict Resolution

Working Groups are encouraged to attempt to resolve conflicts amongst themselves, however if no resolution can be arrived at issues can be escalated to The Board by Working Group Champions for arbitration and resolution. The Board is empowered to resolve conflicts between working groups at their distrection. Working Groups agree to honour the decisions of The Board.

# Outstanding Issues

* What other resources are required to run a typical Working Group?
* Do all working groups need to report to the Board? How and when? Yes, Working Groups need to present at least once a year at the Board's discretion (at the AGM).
* Do you need to be a society member to join a working group? No, but the Champion does.
* How do we evaluate the effectiveness of a Working Group?
* Are there any existing activities which would benefit from a Working Group? Meetups might for example?
* How do working groups work together on an activity? Who owns the work? How are conflicts resolved? (Delegate to the board for resolution)
* What is the policy for the openness of participation in a Working Group? Can anyone join? Are there WGs with limited members? Private groups?
* How do we recognize the work and effort of the Working Groups?
* What is the right place to maintain a list of active Working Groups? This document? Somewhere else?

# References

* [DES Member Agreement](https://docs.google.com/document/d/17pcwYpe9QqvEUOyMyzwBoCvKrJjOxvP15UCjijOXMk4/edit?usp=sharing)

# Acknowledgements

This process is heavily inspired by the Working Groups of other organizations like the W3C, IEEE, and TC39. We'd like to acknowledge their work which stand as a model for the process outlined here.
