---
RFC: "0001"
title: Request For Collaboration Process
author: Mark Bennett <mark@devedmonton.com>
type: process
status: proposal
---

# Abstract

# Participate

* [Fork or file issues on GitHub](https://github.com/devedmonton/rfcs/blob/master/_rfcs/rfc-0001.md)

# Status

This proposal has outstanding issues to address.

The Society is currently "dog fooding" this process and looking for feedback from key stakeholders, members, and Working Group Champions. Send feedback to mark@devedmonton.com, or [create a pull request and file issues on GitHub](https://github.com/devedmonton/rfcs).

This process will be reviewed with a plan to become an official process in August 2020.

# Author(s)

* Mark Bennett <mark@devedmonton.com>

# Motivation

As a society we want to improve the lives of Edmonton developers as much as possible, enriching the broader community through them. We believe that the Dev Society membership is in the best position to decide how to achieve this objective, and want to make it as simple as possible for developers to help themselves.

The Request For Collaboration process allows any member to put forward an idea for a process, standard, or best practice for sharing and adoption by the entire Edmonton developer community.

It's the hope that during this process the RFC is shaped and polished through constructive feedback and collaborative with the community, and with the suport of a Working Group, until concensus can be found and an optimal RFC is realized.

Once realized RFCs should be static and maintained for historical purposes, however newer RFCs may obsolete old ones. If deemed no longer useful then they may also be deprecated.

# Background

The Dev Edmonton Society seeks to be as collaborative and open as possible with it's members, developers, and the broader community. We believe open collaboration benefits everyone by building concensus, and that many eyes improve the quality of the end result.

Many other organizations (Python, ECMAScript, Go, Java, IETF, W3C, etc.) rely on a Request For Comments process to gather input from many implementors and experts as they develop new technical processes and standards. Given our members technical backgrounds we feel it's reasonable to assume that they may be familiar with these kind of processes already, and as such would be comfortable using RFCs to collaborate.

The editors of this process thought it important to name our implementation a Request For Collaboration, rather than Request For Comment, as it places the emphasise on an active process between peers, rather than a more one-way conversation. We hope this spirit of collaboration is celebrated and encouraged throughout the RFC process as our members experience it.

All RFCs are driven by a Working Group who supports, champions the development of, and ultimately authorizes the final RFC. Each Working Group has a specific area of authority, and are typically also made up of the members who will implement or are affected by the RFC. If no Working Group exists to authorize the work of an RFC then one should be created to do this, or the RFC withdrawn. See [RFC-0002](./rfc-0002.html) for a list of the current working groups and how to start one.

# What Is an RFC

In essence an RFC represents a process, standard, or best practice that the Society is exploring and implements.

Depending on the stage of the RFC it may have just been proposed, or it may have been thoroughly reviewed, implemented, and accepted.

RFCs document the learnings and knowledge of the Society, and provide insight into both why we do, and why we don't. Each RFC should reflect the various, sometimes opposing, opinions around the RFC and seek to build concensus. That doesn't neccesarily mean that all Society members will agree with an RFC, but ideally those that don't can at least understand and support it. It's the RFC authors job to collaborate with the community and build this concensus with the support of the Working Group and Board.

RFCs are implemented and authorized by the various Working Groups that carry out the actions of the Society. In a few cases RFCs will impact the entire Society as a whole. In these cases the Society as a whole with authorize and implement the RFC, under guidance from The Board. It's the role of the Board to determine which Working Group has authority over an RFC, and RFC author's to seek this clarification before proposing a new RFC. Should a dispute arise over which Working Group oversees an RFC the Board has final authority to resolve this.

** NOTE: This section is very draft and will probably change as we figure out how much we want in the repo, and how much we want to do in GitHub pull requests. **

Each RFC has a status which changes over it's lifetime. When first put forward all RFCs begin as a proposal. Once the author has completed preparing the RFC and would like a Working Group to formally begin developing it, they submit the proposal on the working group mailing list where members vote on it. If approved it formally becomes a draft RFC and becomes part of the regular Working Group agenda. After the Working Group is satisfied concensus on the RFC has been reached they can vote to approve it at which point it becomes an active RFC. If the vote fails then work on the RFC can continue or it can be withdrawn. Accepted RFCs then remain in affect until they are deprecated or superseded by another RFC in the future.

# Proposing an RFC

Any member can submit a proposal by [forking the Dev Edmonton Society RFC repository and creating a work in progress pull request](https://github.com/devedmonton/rfcs).

Who can put forward an RFC?
How is an RFC number assigned?
Why do we need this RFC?
Who does this RFC impact?
What background do you need to understand this RFC?
How do you collaborate with the development of this RFC?
Which Working Group will guide and approve this RFC? (Board has oversight, so seek input if needed)
Which issues are outstanding?
Have alternatives and dissenting opinions been documented and considered?
What references help understand and provide context for this RFC?

# Drafting the RFC

# Approving an RFC

All RFCs follow the same approval process regardless of the Working Group overseeing them. This ensures that all members understand the approval process for new RFCs, and each is given the same time and consideration before being accepted.

As with other RFC processes, an RFC must be submitted for approval to a Working Group mailing list and on the Working Groups Slack. Working Group members then have two weeks to discuss and vote. At the end of the two weeks votes are tallied and the RFC will be accepted or remain in draft. As the objective of each RFC is to build concensus a two-thirds majority is neccessary for an RFC to be approved.

It's the expectation of the Society that at this point the RFCs authors either address feedback and submit for approval again, or accept that concensus will not be reached and withdraw the proposal.

# Withdrawing an RFC

An RFCs author may at any time choose to withdraw an RFC that has not been accepted. This signals that work on the RFC has stopped, and a new RFC must be stared should work in a similar area resume.

Withdrawn RFCs are recorded and maintained for posterity. The issues and information they contain is valuable and can assist with building concensus for other RFCs in the future.

Withdrawing an RFC is a standard and reasonable part of the RFC process. For example, during complex decision making multiple RFCs can be put forward and championed by different members of the community (as was the case for the Python organization when establishing the new Benevalent Dictator For Life processes). By having multiple RFCs, each can be fully explored and discussed, and alternatives withdrawn when the chosen RFC is approved.

# Superseding an existing RFC

# Deprecating an RFC

# Stages of an RFC

# Outstanding Issues

* In which case should a finished RFC be updated? (Formatting, deprecation, retirement, etc.)
* Are finished RFCs static and replaced by a new RFC, or updated?
* Do all Working Groups need to follow the same process to approve new RFCs?
* Does the Board need to approve each RFC?
* Does the Board need to approve which Working Group approves each RFC?
* How does one vote on an RFC? (We should look to see how PEP, TC39, etc. handle this.)
* How much do we want to rely on GitHib pull requests vs using the RFC states?
* The PEP process has a concept of deferred RFCs which have been abandoned by their authors and are no longer being developed. Do we need this status, or can we just withdraw the RFC and a new one be created later?

# References

* [PEP 1 -- PEP Purpose and Guidelines](https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0001/)
* [IETF RFC 7282 - On Consensus and Humming in the IETF](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7282)
* [IETF RFC 7322 - RFC Style Guide](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7322)
* [TC39 (ECMAScript) Process](https://tc39.es/process-document/)

# Related RFCs

* [RFC-0002 - Working Groups Process](./rfc-0002.html)

# Acknowledgements

This process is heavily inspired by the Working Groups of other organizations like the W3C, IEEE, and TC39. We'd like to acknowledge their work which stand as a model for the process outlined here.
